---
layout: page
title:  "Getting started"
lang: en
permalink: "/getting-started/"
trans_url: "/pour-commencer/"
---

### Overview

The purpose of the GC Forms API is to allow you to securely and reliably retrieve form submissions directly from an API endpoint. Our hope is that this will eventually alleviate the level of effort associated with the retrieval of data and the tedious confirmation flows for high volumes of form submissions. So, rather than having to manually download and sign off on the removal of responses to confirm their retrieval from the database, the API will automate the workflow with systems that talk to each other and exchange data. 

### What you will need

  - A [GC Forms staging account](https://forms-staging.cdssandbox.xyz/) (used for temporary testing only)
  - A form set to deliver responses via “Download” in Settings 
  - A few “mock” responses submitted to the form
  - A target system where you plan on receiving form submission data
  - An API key (generated by you in Settings > API Access) 
  - Infrastructure development resources who can craft HTTP requests and use Azure or AWS to reach the API

^ No infrastructure development capabilities available? 
^ This first version of the API might not be ready for you just yet. Consider choosing an alternative no-code delivery option to get responses by email or download them from GC Forms instead.

### Getting the API key 

**To create an API key for this initial integration testing:**
  1. Sign in to [GC Forms staging](https://forms-staging.cdssandbox.xyz/) (used for temporary testing only).
  2. Create a draft form.
  3. Go to “Settings” in the side navigation and then “API Access” in the tab menu.
  4. Click “Generate Key”.
  5. Download JSON file that includes the private API key.

:warning: **IMPORTANT:** You must keep this API key secure as it is used to authenticate API requests and could be used to access protected data. Use encrypted email if you must share it with a developer team member to set up the integration.
